.\" Manpage for globtrotr.
.TH GLOBTROTR 1 "2026-06-15" "marcattacks 2.10.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
globtrotr \- list files at a local or remote endpoint by extension
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B globtrotr
.RI [ options ]
.I url
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B globtrotr
expands a container URL with a
.BI @glob: EXT
suffix into the list of member files whose names end in
.IR EXT ,
printing one resolved URL per line on standard output. It is the discovery
companion to
.BR marcattacks (1):
feed its output to a loop to process each file in turn.
.PP
Supported endpoints are local directories
.RB ( file:// ),
HTTP(S) LDP\-style containers, SFTP directories, and S3 buckets. Use
.B @glob:*
to match every member regardless of extension.
.PP
Without a
.BI @glob: EXT
suffix the input URL is printed back unchanged.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I url
A container URL ending in
.BI @glob: EXT\fR.
Schemes:
.BR file:// ", " http:// ", " https:// ", " sftp:// ", " s3:// ", " s3s:// .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fI<config>\fR
Path to a
.B .env
file with credentials. Default:
.B .env
in the current directory.
.TP
.BI \-\-key " <keyfile>"
Path to an SFTP private key file.
.TP
.BI \-\-key\-env " <env>"
Name of an environment variable holding an SFTP private key.
.TP
.BI \-\-log " <format>"
Logging format/destination:
.BR json ", " stdout ", or " json+stdout .
.TP
.B \-\-info
Enable info\-level logging.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug\-level logging.
.TP
.B \-\-trace
Enable trace\-level logging.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success; the matching URLs were listed.
.TP
.B 64
.RB ( USAGE )
An unsupported URL scheme was given.
.TP
.B 66
.RB ( NOINPUT )
The container (directory/bucket) was not found.
.TP
.B 70
.RB ( SOFTWARE )
An unexpected internal error.
.TP
.B 74
.RB ( IOERR )
A read/connection failure while listing the container.
.TP
.B 76
.RB ( PROTOCOL )
A remote protocol error (HTTP 4xx/5xx).
.TP
.B 77
.RB ( NOPERM )
Permission denied.
.PP
See
.BR marcattacks (1)
for the full
.IR sysexits.h (3)
code list.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SFTP_USERNAME
Fallback SFTP user name.
.TP
.B SFTP_PASSWORD
Fallback SFTP password.
.TP
.B S3_ACCESS_KEY
Fallback S3 access key.
.TP
.B S3_SECRET_KEY
Fallback S3 secret key.
.PP
Credentials embedded in the URL take precedence over the environment.
.SH EXAMPLES
List every
.B .xml
file in an SFTP directory:
.PP
.RS
.EX
globtrotr \-\-key ~/.ssh/mykey \\
    sftp://user@host:22/remote/path/@glob:xml
.EE
.RE
.PP
List every member of an S3 bucket over TLS:
.PP
.RS
.EX
globtrotr s3s://accessKey:secretKey@host:9000/bucket/@glob:*
.EE
.RE
.PP
Process each discovered file with
.BR marcattacks (1):
.PP
.RS
.EX
globtrotr 'file:///data/marc/@glob:xml' | while read \-r url; do
    marcattacks \-\-from fastxml \-\-to jsonl "$url"
done
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR marcattacks (1)
.PP
Project home: https://codeberg.org/phochste/marcattacks
.SH AUTHOR
Patrick Hochstenbach.
