.\" Manpage for marcattacks.
.TH MARCATTACKS 1 "2026-06-15" "marcattacks 2.10.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
marcattacks \- streaming MARC21 converter and transformer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B marcattacks
.RI [ options ]
.I file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B marcattacks
reads a MARC record source, optionally transforms each record with a mapper,
and writes the result in another format. Input and output are fully streamed,
so files larger than memory are processed a record at a time.
.PP
The
.I file
argument is a local path or a (pseudo\-)URL (see
.B URL SCHEMES
below). Output goes to standard output by default, or to the destination given
with
.BR \-\-out .
.PP
A run is a pipeline of stages: read \(-> (optional decompress / untar)
\(-> parse
.RB ( \-\-from )
\(-> (optional
.BR \-\-skip / \-\-count )
\(-> (optional map,
.BR \-\-map )
\(-> serialize
.RB ( \-\-to )
\(-> write
.RB ( \-\-out ).
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I file
Input source. An existing local path is read directly; otherwise it is parsed
as a URL. Use
.B stdin://
to read standard input.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-from " " \fI<format>\fR
Input format. One of:
.BR alephseq ", " json ", " jsonl ", " marc " (ISO2709), " rdf ", " csv ", " tsv ", " xml " (MARCXML), " fastxml " (optimized MARCXML parser)."
Default:
.BR xml .
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-to " " \fI<format>\fR
Output format. One of:
.BR alephseq ", " csv ", " json ", " jsonl ", " multipart ", " null " (write nothing; for benchmarking), " parquet ", " rdf ", " tsv ", " xml .
Default:
.BR json .
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-map " " \fI<mapper>\fR
Record transform. Built\-in mappers:
.BR avram ", " fix " (Catmandu Fix, see " \-\-param " " fix=<file> "), " jsonata " (default), " marc2rdf ", " marcids ", " marcinrdf .
A path to a JavaScript plugin may also be given.
Default:
.BR jsonata .
.TP
.BI \-\-fix " <what>"
Shorthand for
.BI \-\-param " fix=<what>"
(a JSONata or Catmandu Fix expression or file, depending on
.BR \-\-map ).
An explicit
.BI \-\-param " fix="
takes precedence if both are given.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-param " " \fI<key=value>\fR
Pass a parameter to the input, map, or output stage. May be repeated. The value
is everything after the first
.BR = ,
so JSONata/Fix expressions and query strings containing
.B =
are preserved.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-out " " \fI<dest>\fR
Output destination: a local file path, or an
.BR sftp:// ", " s3:// " or " s3s://
URL. Default: standard output.
.TP
.BI \-\-acl " <acl>"
Canned S3 ACL for uploaded objects when
.B \-\-out
is an S3 URL, e.g.
.BR public\-read .
Unset by default.
.TP
.B \-\-z
Decompress gzip input. Auto\-detected for
.BR .gz " and " .tgz
names; use this flag to force it otherwise.
.TP
.B \-\-tar
Untar input. Auto\-detected for
.BR .tar ", " .tar.* " and " .tgz
names; use this flag to force it otherwise.
.TP
.BI \-\-count " <num>"
Output only the first
.I num
records, then stop and tear the pipeline down.
.TP
.BI \-\-skip " <num>"
Skip the first
.I num
records.
.TP
.BI \-\-workers " <num>"
Run the
.B \-\-map
stage on
.I num
worker threads; output order is preserved. Default
.B auto
uses CPU cores \(mi 1, and only threads heavy maps (jsonata); cheap maps such as
.B fix
stay single\-threaded unless a number is given. Use
.B 1
to disable threading.
.TP
.BI \-\-key " <keyfile>"
Path to an SFTP private key file.
.TP
.BI \-\-key\-env " <env>"
Name of an environment variable holding an SFTP private key.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fI<config>\fR
Path to a
.B .env
file with credentials. Default:
.B .env
in the current directory.
.TP
.BI \-\-log " <format>"
Logging format/destination. Comma\-free tokens:
.B json
(JSON log lines),
.B stdout
(log to stdout instead of stderr), or
.B json+stdout
for both.
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-every " <num>"
Emit an info progress line every
.I num
records. Default:
.BR 1000 .
.TP
.B \-\-info
Enable info\-level logging.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug\-level logging.
.TP
.B \-\-trace
Enable trace\-level logging.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.SH URL SCHEMES
The
.I file
argument and the
.B \-\-out
destination accept:
.TP
.I path
A local filesystem path.
.TP
.B stdin://
Read from standard input (input only).
.TP
.BI file:// path
A local file URL.
.TP
.BR http:// ", " https://
An HTTP(S) resource (input only).
.TP
.BI sftp:// user@host:port/path
An SFTP resource. Provide a key with
.B \-\-key
or
.BR \-\-key\-env ,
or credentials in the URL / environment.
.TP
.BR s3:// ", " s3s://
An S3 object,
.IB accessKey : secretKey @ host : port /bucket/key\fR.
.B s3s://
uses TLS.
.PP
Container URLs support two modifiers appended to a directory/bucket path:
.BI @latest: EXT
resolves to the most recently modified member with extension
.IR EXT ,
and
.BI @glob: EXT
(with
.BR globtrotr (1))
lists all members with extension
.IR EXT .
.SH EXIT STATUS
Exit codes follow the BSD
.IR sysexits.h (3)
conventions:
.TP
.B 0
Success, or a benign stop (the downstream reader closed the pipe, e.g.
.BR "| head" ,
or
.B \-\-count
reached its limit).
.TP
.B 64
.RB ( USAGE )
Bad invocation: missing input file, missing
.BR \-\-from ,
an unknown
.BR \-\-from / \-\-to / \-\-map
plugin name, or an unsupported URL scheme.
.TP
.B 65
.RB ( DATAERR )
The input could not be parsed (malformed XML/JSON/MARC record).
.TP
.B 66
.RB ( NOINPUT )
The input file, object, or
.B @latest
target was not found.
.TP
.B 70
.RB ( SOFTWARE )
Internal error: a worker thread crashed, or a plugin file failed to load.
.TP
.B 73
.RB ( CANTCREAT )
The output could not be created (the
.B \-\-out
file or S3 object).
.TP
.B 74
.RB ( IOERR )
A read/write/connection failure mid\-stream (dropped connection, premature
close).
.TP
.B 76
.RB ( PROTOCOL )
A remote protocol error (HTTP 4xx/5xx, too many redirects).
.TP
.B 77
.RB ( NOPERM )
Permission denied.
.TP
.B 78
.RB ( CONFIG )
A configuration or credential error.
.PP
When output is piped to a pager such as
.BR less (1)
and you quit mid\-stream,
.B marcattacks
restores the terminal and exits via
.B SIGKILL
(status 137) to keep the terminal usable; this is unavoidable for the
interactive raw\-mode case. A plain
.BR "| head" ,
a file/pipe sink, or a cron run is detected as benign and exits 0.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Credentials may be supplied in the resource URL, on the command line, or via the
environment (the URL takes precedence; the environment is a fallback). Variables
are read from the
.B \-\-config
.B .env
file if present.
.TP
.B SFTP_USERNAME
Fallback SFTP user name.
.TP
.B SFTP_PASSWORD
Fallback SFTP password.
.TP
.B S3_ACCESS_KEY
Fallback S3 access key.
.TP
.B S3_SECRET_KEY
Fallback S3 secret key.
.PP
A private key may be read from an arbitrary variable named with
.BR \-\-key\-env .
.SH EXAMPLES
Convert MARCXML to JSON:
.PP
.RS
.EX
marcattacks \-\-to json ./data/sample.xml
.EE
.RE
.PP
Use the fast MARCXML parser and emit JSON Lines:
.PP
.RS
.EX
marcattacks \-\-from fastxml \-\-to jsonl ./data/sample.xml
.EE
.RE
.PP
Map MARC to RDF:
.PP
.RS
.EX
marcattacks \-\-to rdf \-\-map marc2rdf ./data/sample.xml
.EE
.RE
.PP
Apply a Catmandu Fix script:
.PP
.RS
.EX
marcattacks \-\-to jsonl \-\-map fix \-\-param fix=./demo/marc2rdf.fix ./data/sample.xml
.EE
.RE
.PP
Read the latest XML from an SFTP directory, threaded:
.PP
.RS
.EX
marcattacks \-\-key ~/.ssh/key \-\-workers 4 \\
    sftp://user@host:22/data/@latest:xml
.EE
.RE
.PP
Write Parquet to S3:
.PP
.RS
.EX
marcattacks input.xml \-\-to parquet \-o s3://key:secret@host:9000/bucket/out.parquet
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR globtrotr (1)
.PP
Project home: https://codeberg.org/phochste/marcattacks
.SH AUTHOR
Patrick Hochstenbach.
